docs: how to use layers (#548)
canonical/pebble: docs/how-to/use-layers.md

# How to use layers

Managing multiple services across different environments becomes complex as systems scale. Pebble simplifies this with layered configurations, improving readability and maintainability.

> A base layer defines common settings (such as logging), while additional layers handle specific services or environment-specific overrides. This declarative approach, along with delegated layer management, allows for better cross-team collaboration and provides a clear view of each environment's configuration. For example, an operations team could manage base layers for logging, and service teams could manage layers for their services.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think this is great -- particularly the last sentence really describes it well.

## Pebble layers

A layer is a configuration file that defines the desired state of services running on a system. 

Layers are organized within a `layers/` subdirectory in the `$PEBBLE` directory. Their filenames are similar to `001-base-layer.yaml`, where the numerically prefixed filenames ensure a specific order of the layers, and the labels after the prefix uniquely identifies the layer. For example, `001-base-layer.yaml`, `002-override-layer.yaml`.

> A layer specifies service properties including the command to execute, startup behavior, dependencies on other services, and environment variables. For example:

Reviewer: This is still too service-specific. A layer can describe service properties as well as health checks and log targets.

```yaml

> summary: Simple layer

Reviewer: I think this can be significantly improved and shortened:

- We can probably drop the summary and description, as hardly anyone uses those. They are defined in the layer spec for people who really want to know.
- There are too many services and too fields. How about we have just two services, and drop `summary`, `startup`, and keep `requires` and `environment` (those are ones that are really used).
- And then maybe add a really simple health check, to show that it's not just services.
- In addition, could we make it a bit more real? Maybe have services `server` and `cron` or something.

description: |
    A better description for a simple layer.

services:
    srv1:
        override: replace
        summary: Service summary
        command: cmd arg1 "arg2a arg2b"
        startup: enabled
        after:
            - srv2
        before:
            - srv3
        requires:
            - srv2
            - srv3
        environment:
            VAR1: val1
            VAR2: val2
            VAR3: val3

    srv2:
        override: replace
        startup: enabled
        command: cmd
        before:
            - srv3

    srv3:
        override: replace
        command: cmd
```

For full details of all fields, see [layer specification](../reference/layer-specification).

## Layer override

Each layer can define new services or modify existing ones defined in preceding layers. The mandatory `override` field in each service definition determines how the layer's configuration interacts with the previously defined service of the same name (if any):

- `override: replace` completely replaces the previous definition of a service.
- `override: merge` combines the current layer's settings with the existing ones, allowing for incremental modifications.

> Any of the fields can be replaced individually in a merged service configuration. See the [full layer specification](../reference/layer-specification) for details.

Reviewer: I think it'd be good to show a very simple override layer here, that maybe adds one environment variable to `server`, and then show the merged result. Something like:

```
services:
  server:
    override: replace
    environment:
        PORT: 8081
```

The final environment from the combined (merged) layers will be:

```
DATABASE=dbserver.example.com
PORT=8081
```

Or similar.

# How to use layers

> Managing multiple services across different environments becomes complex as systems scale. Pebble simplifies this with layered configurations, improving readability and maintainability. A base layer defines common settings (like logging), while additional layers handle specific services or environment-specific overrides. This declarative approach, along with delegated layer management (for example, operations team managing base layers for logging, service teams managing their services layers), allows for better cross-team collaboration and provides a clear view of each environment's configuration.

Reviewer 2: This intro is good. I recommend splitting it to make it easier to read, and also avoid a long part in brackets:

```suggestion
Managing multiple services across different environments becomes complex as systems scale. Pebble simplifies this with layered configurations, improving readability and maintainability.

A base layer defines common settings (like logging), while additional layers handle specific services or environment-specific overrides. This declarative approach, along with delegated layer management, allows for better cross-team collaboration and provides a clear view of each environment's configuration. For example, an operations team could manage base layers for logging, and service teams could manage their services layers.
```

## Pebble layers

A layer is a configuration file that defines the desired state of services running on a system. 

> Layers are organized within a `layers/` subdirectory in the `$PEBBLE` directory, and their filenames are similar to `001-base-layer.yaml`, where the numerically prefixed filenames ensure a specific order of the layers, and the labels after the prefix uniquely identifies the layer. For example, `001-base-layer.yaml`, `002-override-layer.yaml`.

Reviewer 2: Recommend splitting the sentence:

```suggestion
Layers are organized within a `layers/` subdirectory in the `$PEBBLE` directory. Their filenames are similar to `001-base-layer.yaml`, where the numerically prefixed filenames ensure a specific order of the layers, and the labels after the prefix uniquely identifies the layer. For example, `001-base-layer.yaml`, `002-override-layer.yaml`.
```

> A layer specifies service properties like the command to execute, startup behaviour, dependencies on other services, and environment variables. For example:

Reviewer 2: Recommend changing "like" to "including", since we're listing a subset of the properties:

```suggestion
A layer specifies service properties including the command to execute, startup behaviour, dependencies on other services, and environment variables. For example:
```

description: |
    A better description for a simple layer.

services:
    srv1:
        override: replace
        summary: Service summary
        command: cmd arg1 "arg2a arg2b"
        startup: enabled
        after:
            - srv2
        before:
            - srv3
        requires:
            - srv2
            - srv3
        environment:
            VAR1: val1
            VAR2: val2
            VAR3: val3

    srv2:
        override: replace
        startup: enabled
        command: cmd
        before:
            - srv3

    srv3:
        override: replace
        command: cmd
```

For full details of all fields, see [layer specification](../reference/layer-specification).

## Layer override

Each layer can define new services or modify existing ones defined in preceding layers. The mandatory `override` field in each service definition determines how the layer's configuration interacts with the previously defined service of the same name (if any):

- `override: replace` completely replaces the previous definition of a service.
- `override: merge` combines the current layer's settings with the existing ones, allowing for incremental modifications.

> Any of the fields can be replaced individually in a merged service configuration. To illustrate, here is a sample override layer that might sit on top of the one defined in the previous section:
> 
> ```{code-block} yaml
> :emphasize-lines: 5-11,15-16,19-26
> 
> summary: Simple override layer
> 
> services:
>     srv1:
>         override: merge
>         environment:
>             VAR3: val3
>         after:
>             - srv4
>         before:
>             - srv5
> 
>     srv2:
>         override: replace
>         summary: Replaced service
>         startup: disabled
>         command: cmd
> 
>     srv4:
>         override: replace
>         command: cmd
>         startup: enabled
> 
>     srv5:
>         override: replace
>         command: cmd
> ```
> 
> See the [full layer specification](../reference/layer-specification) for more details.

Reviewer 2: I would actually be OK to remove this example, now that we have a more realistic example later in the doc.

```suggestion
Any of the fields can be replaced individually in a merged service configuration. See the [full layer specification](../reference/layer-specification) for details.
```

## Use layers to manage services

> If we are to manage multiple services and environments, we can use a base layer to define common settings like logging, and other layers to define services.

Reviewer 2: Minor recommendation:

```suggestion
If we are to manage multiple services and environments, we can use a base layer to define common settings such as logging, and other layers to define services.
```

> For example, if we have a few teams and each owns different services:

Reviewer 2: Minor recommendation:

```suggestion
For example, suppose that we have some teams that own different services:
```

- The operations team: a test Loki server and a staging Loki server (centralized logging systems).
- Team foo: `svc1` and `svc2`, whose logs need to be forwarded to the test Loki server.
- Team bar: `svc3` and `svc4`, whose logs need to be forwarded to the staging Loki server.

> The operations team can define a base layer named `001-base-layer.yaml` with multiple log targets, and they don't need to worry about which services logs should be forwarded to which log targets. In the base layer, `services: [all]` can be used as a start:

Reviewer 2: Minor, but "services logs" should be "services' logs". Actually I think it would be fine like this:

```suggestion
The operations team can define a base layer named `001-base-layer.yaml` with multiple log targets, and they don't need to worry about which service logs should be forwarded to which log targets. In the base layer, `services: [all]` can be used as a start:
```

```yaml
summary: a base layer for log targets
log-targets:
  test:
    override: merge
    type: loki
    location: http://my-test-loki-server:3100/loki/api/v1/push
    services: [all]
    labels:
      owner: '$OWNER'
      env: 'test'
  staging:
    override: merge
    type: loki
    location: http://my-staging-loki-server:3100/loki/api/v1/push
    services: [all]
    labels:
      owner: '$OWNER'
      env: 'staging'
```

For more information on log targets and log forwarding, see [How to forward logs to Loki](./forward-logs-to-loki).

> Team foo can define another layer named `002-foo.yaml` without having to redefine the log targets. However, they can decide which services logs are forwarded to which targets by overriding the `services` configuration of a predefined log target in the base layer:

Reviewer 2: I'd recommend:

```suggestion
Team foo can define another layer named `002-foo.yaml` without having to redefine the log targets. However, they can decide which service logs are forwarded to which targets by overriding the `services` configuration of a predefined log target in the base layer:
```

```yaml
summary: layer managed by team foo
services:
  svc1:
    override: replace
    command: cmd
    startup: enabled
    environment:
      OWNER: 'foo'
  svc2:
    override: replace
    command: cmd
    startup: enabled
    environment:
      OWNER: 'foo'
log-targets:
  test:
    override: merge
    services: [svc1, svc2]
```

Team bar can define yet another layer named `003-bar.yaml`:

```yaml
summary: layer managed by team bar
services:
  svc3:
    override: replace
    command: cmd
    startup: enabled
    environment:
      OWNER: 'bar'
  svc4:
    override: replace
    command: cmd
    startup: enabled
    environment:
      OWNER: 'bar'
log-targets:
  staging:
    override: merge
    services: [svc3, svc4]
```

> In this way, logs for `svc1` and `svc2` managed by team foo ar forwarded to the test Loki, and logs for `svc3` and `svc4` managed by team bar are forwarded to the staging Loki, all with corresponding labels attached. Each team owns its own layer, achieving true cross-team collaboration and delegated layer management.

Reviewer 2: Missing e:

```suggestion
In this way, logs for `svc1` and `svc2` managed by team foo are forwarded to the test Loki, and logs for `svc3` and `svc4` managed by team bar are forwarded to the staging Loki, all with corresponding labels attached. Each team owns its own layer, achieving true cross-team collaboration and delegated layer management.
```

# How to use layers

Managing multiple services across different environments becomes complex as systems scale. Pebble simplifies this with layered configurations, improving readability and maintainability.

A base layer defines common settings (such as logging), while additional layers handle specific services or environment-specific overrides. This declarative approach, along with delegated layer management, allows for better cross-team collaboration and provides a clear view of each environment's configuration. For example, an operations team could manage base layers for logging, and service teams could manage layers for their services.

(use_layers_pebble_layers)=
## Pebble layers

A layer is a configuration file that defines the desired state of the managed services.

> Layers are organized within a `layers/` subdirectory in the `$PEBBLE` directory. Their filenames are similar to `001-base-layer.yaml`, where the numerically prefixed filenames ensure a specific order of the layers, and the labels after the prefix uniquely identifies the layer. For example, `001-base-layer.yaml`, `002-override-layer.yaml`.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion for grammar:

```suggestion
Layers are organized within a `layers/` subdirectory in the `$PEBBLE` directory. Their filenames are similar to `001-base-layer.yaml`, where the numerically prefixed filenames ensure a specific order of the layers, and the labels after the prefix uniquely identify the layers. For example, `001-base-layer.yaml`, `002-override-layer.yaml`.
```

A layer can define service properties, health checks, and log targets. For example:

```yaml
services:
  server:
    override: replace
    command: flask --app hello run
    requires:
      - srv2
    environment:
      PORT: 5000
      DATABASE: dbserver.example.com
  database:
    override: replace
    command: postgres -D /usr/local/pgsql/data

checks:
  server-liveness:

>     override: replace

Reviewer 2: Since this is a liveness check, should we add `level: alive` too?

Author: According to Ben's previous comment, I added a very simple check, so I'm leaving it as the minimal form like this.

# How to use layers

Managing multiple services across different environments becomes complex as systems scale. Pebble simplifies this with layered configurations, improving readability and maintainability.

A base layer defines common settings (such as logging), while additional layers handle specific services or environment-specific overrides. This declarative approach, along with delegated layer management, allows for better cross-team collaboration and provides a clear view of each environment's configuration. For example, an operations team could manage base layers for logging, and service teams could manage layers for their services.

(use_layers_pebble_layers)=
## Pebble layers

A layer is a configuration file that defines the desired state of the managed services.

Layers are organized within a `layers/` subdirectory in the `$PEBBLE` directory. Their filenames are similar to `001-base-layer.yaml`, where the numerically prefixed filenames ensure a specific order of the layers, and the labels after the prefix uniquely identifies the layer. For example, `001-base-layer.yaml`, `002-override-layer.yaml`.

> A layer can define service properties (command, startup behavior, dependencies, environment variables, and more), health checks, and log targets. For example:

Reviewer: I think we should just drop the details in parens here:
```suggestion
A layer can define service properties, health checks, and log targets. For example:
```

```yaml
services:
  server:
    override: replace
    command: flask --app hello run
    after:
      - srv2
    requires:
      - srv2
    environment:
      PORT: 5000
      DATABASE: dbserver.example.com
  database:
    override: replace
    command: postgres -D /usr/local/pgsql/data
    before:
      - srv1

> checks:

Reviewer: Here and below: let's add a blank line between top-level sections for readability.
```suggestion

checks:
```

  server-liveness:
    override: replace
    http:
      url: http://127.0.0.1:5000/health
```

For full details of all fields, see [layer specification](../reference/layer-specification).

## Layer override

> Each layer can define new services or modify existing ones defined in preceding layers. The mandatory `override` field in each service definition determines how the layer's configuration interacts with the previously defined service of the same name (if any):

Reviewer: How about we add a sentence about combining here. And make it less service-specific:

```suggestion
Each layer can define new services (and health checks and log targets) or modify existing ones defined in preceding layers. The layers -- ordered by numerical prefix -- are combined into the final plan.

The required `override` field in each service (or health check or log target) determines how the layer's configuration interacts with the previously defined object of the same name (if any):
```

- `override: replace` completely replaces the previous definition of a service.
- `override: merge` combines the current layer's settings with the existing ones, allowing for incremental modifications.

Any of the fields can be replaced individually in a merged service configuration.

> For example, the following is an override layer that can be merged with the example layer defined in the previous section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following is an override layer that can be combined with the example layer defined in the previous section:
```

```{code-block} yaml
:emphasize-lines: 5,10

services:
  server:
    override: merge
    environment:

>       PORT: 8080

Reviewer: Let's also add a new environment variable here to show the merging more effectively. Maybe `VERBOSE_LOGGING: 1` or something.

checks:
  server-liveness:

>     override: merge

Reviewer: This one could be `override: replace` as the merge really has no effect here, and it'd be nice to show replace anyway.

Author: Merge has an effect because the URL is different, the merged result will update the URL, but `override` would still stay as `replace` as defined in previous layers. But I agree it's good to show another possible value here; the result will be the same. I will use `merge` for services and `replace` for checks in this example.

    http:
      url: http://127.0.0.1:8080/health
```

> And the merged result will be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And the combined plan will be:
```

```{code-block} yaml

> :emphasize-lines: 10,21

Reviewer: It's nice with the emphasized lines!

(use_layers_pebble_layers)=
## Pebble layers

A layer is a configuration file that defines the desired state of the managed services.

Layers are organized within a `layers/` subdirectory in the `$PEBBLE` directory. Their filenames are similar to `001-base-layer.yaml`, where the numerically prefixed filenames ensure a specific order of the layers, and the labels after the prefix uniquely identifies the layer. For example, `001-base-layer.yaml`, `002-override-layer.yaml`.

A layer can define service properties, health checks, and log targets. For example:

```yaml
services:
  server:
    override: replace
    command: flask --app hello run
    requires:
      - srv2
    environment:
      PORT: 5000
      DATABASE: dbserver.example.com
  database:
    override: replace
    command: postgres -D /usr/local/pgsql/data
    before:

>       - srv1

Reviewer: Let's get rid of the "before" too (here and below).

# How to use layers

Orchestrating multiple services in remote systems is a common requirement in modern software. Consider a typical web application, which might involve:

- a web server (like Nginx)
- an application server (like uWSGI)
- a database (like PostgreSQL)
- a caching service (like Redis)

Each of these services needs to be configured, started, and stopped in a coordinated manner.

As the system scales, the operational overhead grows exponentially because multiple groups of applications need to be managed, and they need to be deployed in different environments with slightly different configurations. Without proper service orchestration tooling, managing dependencies and ensuring consistent behaviour across multiple services in multiple environments is complex and error-prone. 

> With Pebble, it's possible to reduce this operational overhead by splitting service configurations into different layers, and depending on how we make use of this feature, it can offer great advantages, especially when the system scales out:

Reviewer 2: Small suggestion for readability:
```suggestion
With Pebble, it's possible to reduce this operational overhead by splitting service configurations into different layers. Depending on how we make use of this feature, it can offer great advantages, especially when the system scales out:
```

- We can organize services into logical groups, which greatly improves the readability and maintainability of the configurations. With this declarative, layered approach, it is easier to understand the overall system.
- We can use a declarative and idempotent approach where we define one set of configurations per environment. In this way, we know exactly what's running in a given environment and we don't have to calculate values and patches to know what's in there.

> - While idempotency is generally desirable, layered configurations can also accommodate imperative overrides when necessary. For example, we can define base layers, environment-specific override layers, and temporary patch layers, so that we can apply the base layers across all environments, apply a temporary patch to a specific service, or customize a service for a particular environment.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how to understand idempotency here. Do you mean that applying the same configuration many times wouldn't change the services that are running? What would that look like in practice? In the two bullet points, it seems to me like declarative/imperative is the primary distinction.

Author: After some thought, I think it's wrong to use "idempotent" because the other approach is also idempotent. Although declarative usually is idempotent, non-declarative isn't necessarily non-idempotent. Let me rephrase this to "declarative" and "imperative overlays".

## Layer override

Each layer can define new services or modify existing ones defined in preceding layers. Crucially, the mandatory `override` field in each service definition determines how the layer's configuration interacts with the previously defined service of the same name (if any):

- `override: replace` completely replaces the previous definition of a service.
- `override: merge` combines the current layer's settings with the existing ones, allowing for incremental modifications.

Any of the fields can be replaced individually in a merged service configuration. To illustrate, here is a sample override layer that might sit on top of the one defined in the previous section:

```yaml
summary: Simple override layer

services:
    srv1:
        override: merge
        environment:
            VAR3: val3
        after:
            - srv4
        before:
            - srv5

    srv2:
        override: replace
        summary: Replaced service
        startup: disabled
        command: cmd

    srv4:
        override: replace
        command: cmd
        startup: enabled

    srv5:
        override: replace
        command: cmd

> ```

Reviewer 2: Would it be possible to add some comments in the yaml to highlight some fields that have been overridden? I found it a little bit hard to compare the layers by scrolling up and down

See the [full layer specification](../reference/layer-specification) for more details.

> ---

Reviewer 2: I just noticed that this causes a horizontal line in the output doc. I think we can remove these from between the sections. (Sorry, I just realized what these are doing, and I remember there are some in the other how-to PRs)

## Use layers as logical groups

If we are to orchestrate multiple applications, we can group related ones into the same layer.

For example, if we have an Nginx webserver serving two applications, each with a frontend, a backend and a database:

```

> nginx ──┬──> app2-frontend -> app2->backend -> app2-db
>         └──> app2-frontend -> app2->backend -> app2-db

Reviewer 2: Are there some typos here? It looks like this should be:
```suggestion
nginx ──┬──> app1-frontend -> app1-backend -> app1-db
        └──> app2-frontend -> app2-backend -> app2-db
```

```

> We can group them by applications, for example:

Reviewer 2: "by applications" should be "by application"
```suggestion
We can group them by application. For example:
```

services:
    nginx:
        override: replace
        summary: Nginx
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
```

`002-app1.yaml`:

```yaml
summary: Layer for app1

description: |
    Layer for app1.

services:
    app1-database:
        override: replace
        summary: database for app1
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
    app1-backend:
        override: replace
        summary: backend for app1
        command: foo
        after:
            - app1-database
    app1-frontend:
        override: replace
        summary: frontend for app1
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
        after:
            - app1-backend
```

`003-app2.yaml`:

```yaml
summary: Layer for app2

description: |
    Layer for app2.

services:
    app2-database:
        override: replace
        summary: database for app2
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
    app2-backend:
        override: replace
        summary: backend for app2
        command: foo
        after:
            - app2-database
    app2-frontend:
        override: replace
        summary: frontend for app2
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
        after:
            - app2-backend
```

> Alternatively, we can also group them by functionalities:

Reviewer 2: "by functionalities" should be "by functionality"
```suggestion
Alternatively, we can also group them by functionality:
```

        override: replace
        summary: Nginx
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
```

`002-database.yaml`:

```yaml
summary: Layer for database

description: |
    Layer for database.

services:
    app1-database:
        override: replace
        summary: database for app1
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
    app2-database:
        override: replace
        summary: database for app2
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
```

`003-backend.yaml`:

```yaml
summary: Layer for backend

description: |
    Layer for backend.

services:
    app1-backend:
        override: replace
        summary: backend for app1
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
    app2-backend:
        override: replace
        summary: backend for app2
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
```

`004-frontend.yaml`:

```yaml
summary: Layer for frontend

description: |
    Layer for frontend.

services:
    app1-frontend:
        override: replace
        summary: frontend for app1
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
    app2-frontend:
        override: replace
        summary: frontend for app2
        command: foo
        startup: enabled
```
---

> ## Use override

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering whether we could make the title more explicit. Something like "Use override to configure environments differently"

If we are to run the same set of services in multiple environments with slightly different configurations, we can use a base layer/environment override structure.

> For example, if we have a service `app1` running in both `dev` and `test` environments with slightly different configurations (for example, an environment variable named `ENV` with values as `dev` or `test), we can define a base layer, then two override layers, each for one environment:

Reviewer 2: Small suggestion for readability and fix a typo:
```suggestion
For example, if we have a service `app1` running in both `dev` and `test` environments with slightly different configurations (for example, an environment variable named `ENV` with values as `dev` or `test`), we can define a base layer and an override layer for each environment.
```

`001-base-layer.yaml`:

```yaml
summary: Simple layer

description: |
    A better description for a simple layer.

services:
    app1:
        override: replace
        summary: Service summary
        command: cmd arg1 "arg2a arg2b"
        startup: enabled
```

`002-env-override-dev.yaml`:

```yaml
summary: Override layer for the dev environment.

services:
    app1:
        override: merge
        environment:
            ENV: dev
```

> `002-env-override-test.yaml`:

Reviewer 2: This should be 003-env-override-test.yaml shouldn't it?

Author: The idea is that `override-test` will only be put into the test env and `override-dev` will only be put in the dev env. So it doesn't matter if they have same numeric prefixes because they will not be put into the same env.

Reviewer 2: Oh of course, thanks for clarifying!

```yaml
summary: Override layer for the test environment.

services:
    app1:
        override: merge
        environment:
            ENV: test
```

> In this way, when we use Pebble to run this service in different environments we can put the `001-base-layer.yaml` file into all environments. Then, in the dev environment, we also put the `002-env-override-dev.yaml` file there, and in the test environment, only ``002-env-override-test.yaml`:

Reviewer 2: Small suggestion for readability and fix typos:
```suggestion
In this way, when we use Pebble to run this service in different environments, we can put `001-base-layer.yaml` into all environments. Then we can put `002-env-override-dev.yaml` in the dev environment only, and `003-env-override-test.yaml` in the test environment only.
```

Dev env:

```bash
.
└── layers
    ├── 001-base-layer.yaml
    └── 002-env-override-dev.yaml
```

Test env:

```bash
.
└── layers
    ├── 001-base-layer.yaml

>     └── 002-env-override-test.yaml

Reviewer 2: 003-env-override-test.yaml ?
